# IBM i ODBC Setup

This page will help you set up your ODBC environment for accessing Db2 directly from your IBM i machine (either your local machine or remote IBM i systems). If you want to connect to IBM i from a [Linux](./2.linux.md) or [Windows](./2.windows.md) machine, please consult those pages.

## Driver Manager Installation

On IBM i, we will be using unixODBC as our driver manager. Like all open-source software, you need to use yum to install these packages, which will require you to be using IBM 7.2 or greater. If you do not yet have yum installed on your system, [please consult the installation guide here.](https://ibm.biz/ibmi-rpms)

To use an ODBC connection on your IBM i system, you will need to install the `unixODBC` package. Additionally, if you want to develop your applications using ODBC connections with connectors like pyODBC for Python or odbc for Node.js. you will have to install `unixODBC-devel` as well.

```bash
$ yum install unixODBC unixODBC-devel
```

You now have unixODBC installed on your system. This serves as your driver manager, allowing the ODBC applications you write to communicate with your drivers and from there Db2. 

## Driver Installation

Now that you have the driver manager installed, you will have to install the ODBC driver that allows your IBM i machine to use unixODBC to talk to Db2. To get the driver, visit [the IBM i Access - Client Solutions page](https://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=isg3T1026805) and select **Downloads for IBM i Access Client Solutions**. After logging in and redirected to the IBM I Access Client Solutions download page, scroll down and download the **ODBC driver for IBM i 7.2 or later**.  More complete instructions on how to download this driver can be found at [this TechNote on the ODBC Driver for the IBM i PASE environment](https://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=ibm10885929).

When the driver has been downloaded and unzipped, you can run the rpm with yum the same way you would otherwise, but giving it the location of the file instead of the name of the package:

```bash
$ yum install <package-location>/ibm-iaccess-<version>.rpm
```

This will install the Db2 ODBC driver onto your IBM i system. It will also create a DSN for your local system called `*LOCAL`. This is discussed below.

## Configuration Files

When you have both the driver manager and the driver installed on your system, you will need to set up a few configuration files that define your drivers and datasources for unixODBC.

### **`odbcinst.ini`**

To declare a driver so that it can be referenced in your datasources, you will have to define your driver in a file called `odbcinst.ini`. This file can be found by entering the command 

```
$ odbcinst -j
```

but defaults to installing at `QOpenSys/etc/odbcinst.ini`.  In this file, you define a name for each of your drivers, and tell unixODBC where it can find driver referenced in your datasources. An example `odbcinst.ini` might look like:

**`odbcinst.ini`**
```ini
[IBM i Access ODBC Driver]
Description = IBM i Access ODBC Driver
Driver      = /QOpenSys/pkgs/lib/libcwbodbc.so
```
(Note: You don't have to align the `=` signs, it just looks cleaner.)

When you define datasources in `odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini` (covered below), you will use the name in the `[]` brackets as the name of the driver to use. The IBM i Access ODBC Driver will automatically create driver entries in your `odbcinst.ini` when you install the driver.

If you have multiple drivers to define, you can simply create mutiple entries in the same file, as long as each driver is headed with a driver name in brackets, and no two drivers have the same name.

**`odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini`**

When you have a driver defined, you will want to also define a datasource name, or DSN. A DSN allows you to define a connection and all of your connection options in one place. When you pass a connection string to an ODBC connection, you simply need to pass the name of the DSN and all of the connection options defined with the DSN will also be included.

DSNs are defined in `odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini` (note the `.` preceding the latter). These two files have the same structure, but have one important difference: 

* `odbc.ini` can be found in the IFS in `/QOpenSys/etc` and defines DSNs that are available to **all users on the system**. If there are DSNs that should be available to everyone, they can be defined and shared here.

* `.odbc.ini` is found in your home directory (`~/`) and defines DSNs that are available **only to you**. If you are going to define DSNs with your personal username and password, this is the place to do it.

The files define DSNs similar to how `odbcinst.ini` defines drivers: You name your DSN with `[]` brackets, then specify keywords and values below them. This is an example of a  stored in `~/.odbc.ini` used to connect to an IBM i with private credentials:

```ini
[MYDSN]
Description            = oss73dev IBM i system
Driver                 = IBM i Access ODBC Driver
System                 = OSS73DEV.RCH.STGLABS.IBM.COM 
UserID                 = MYNAME
Password               = password123
Naming                 = 0
DefaultLibraries       = MIRISH
TrueAutoCommit         = 1
```
(**Note: The name of the driver specified in the `Driver` keyword must match the name of a driver defined in `odbcinst.ini`).

Additionally, the `ibm-iaccess.rpm` will automatically create a DSN called `[*LOCAL]` in your `odbc.ini`. When using this DSN, the user credentials used will be `*CURRENT`, which is the user who is running the process that is trying to connect to the ODBC driver. Use of this `*CURRENT` behavior is dependent on some server PTFS:

* 7.2: SI68113
* 7.3: SI69058

A complete list of IBM i Access ODBC Driver connection options for both DSN definitions and connection strings can be found at the [IBM Knowledge Center: Connection string keywords webpage](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/ssw_ibm_i_74/rzaik/connectkeywords.htm).

## Using Your DSNs

With your DSNs now set up, you can use them when connecting to Db2. Many open-source projects have ODBC packages that allow you to use your DSN to connect to Db2 for i. For example, Node.js has the `odbc` package, Python has `pyodbc`, etc.

To use your DSN, simply pass a connection string like so to the connection API for the open-source technology and package of your choice:

```
"DSN=MYDSN"
```
When you pass the connection string above, the odbc driver manager will look at your DSNs (both from the global `odbc.ini` and your personal `.odbc.ini`) and add all of the additional settings defined therein. In this way, you don't need to specify things like your username and password in your application, and can instead rely on your configuration files!