# Linux ODBC Setup

## Driver Manager Installation

On Linux, we will be using unixODBC as our driver manager. To install, use the package manager that comes with your system and search for `unixODBC*`, which should return all packages available to you that begin with "unixODBC". You will have to download `unixODBC` and `unixODBC-devel` or similar (may be named different things on different Linux distributions).

For RedHat, a Linux distribution that uses `yum` as its packag manager (much like IBM i), the following command and output shows how to check for the correct packages to download:

**RedHat example**
```bash
$ yum list available unixODBC*
Available Packages
unixODBC.i686                                2.3.1-11.el7                             RHEL-76-x86_64
unixODBC-devel.i686                          2.3.1-11.el7                             RHEL-76-x86_64
```

Once you know what packages are needed, they can be downloaded also through your package manager:

**RedHat example**
```bash
$ yum install unixODBC unixODBC-devel
```

You now have unixODBC installed on your system

## Driver Installation

Now that you have the driver manager installed, you will have to install the ODBC driver that allows your Linux machine to connect to the IBM i. This driver is distributed through the [Linux Application Package for IBM i Access Client Solutions](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzatv/rzatvkickoff.htm). The Linux Application Package can be downloaded through the [Entitled Systems Support Website](https://www.ibm.com/servers/eserver/ess/index.wss). **Please note, you will need an IBMid and a license for an IBM i system.** 

## Configuration Files

When you have both the driver manager and the driver installed on your system, you will need to set up a few configuration files that define your drivers and datasources for unixODBC.

### **`odbcinst.ini`**

To define your driver so that it can be referenced in your datasource, you will have to define your driver in a file called `odbcinst.ini`. This file can be found at `/etc/unixODBC/odbcinst.ini`. In this file, you define a name for each of your drivers, and tell unixODBC where it can find the driver. an example `odbcinst.ini` might look like:

**`odbcinst.ini`**
```ini
[IBM i Access ODBC Driver]
Description = IBM i Access for Linux ODBC Driver
Driver      = /opt/ibm/iaccess/lib/libcwbodbc.so
```
(Note: You don't have to align the `=` signs, it just looks cleaner.)

When you define datasources in `odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini` (covered below), you will use the name in the `[]` brackets as the name of the driver to use.

If you have multiple drivers to define, you can simply create mutiple entries in the same file, as long as each driver is headed with a driver name in brackets, and no two drivers have the same name.

**`odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini`**

When you have a driver defined, you will want to also define a datasource name, or DSN. A DSN allows you to define a connection and all of your connection options in one place. When you pass a connection string to an ODBC connection, you simply need to pass the name of the DSN and all of the connection options defined with the DSN will also be included.

DSNs are defined in `odbc.ini` and `.odbc.ini` (note the `.` preceding the latter). These two files have the same structure, but have one important difference: 

* `odbc.ini` can be found in `/etc/unixODBC/` and defines DSNs that are available to **all users on the system**. If there are DSNs that should be available to everyone, they can be defined and shared here

* `.odbc.ini` is found in your home directory (`~/`) and defines DSNs that are available **only to you**. If you are going to define DSNs with your personal username and password, this is the place to do it.

The files define DSNs similar to how `odbcinst.ini` defines drivers: You name your DSN with `[]` brackets, then specify keywords and values below them. This is an example of a  stored in `~/.odbc.ini` used to connect to an IBM i with private credentials:

```ini
[MYDSN]
Description            = oss73dev IBM i system
Driver                 = IBM i Access ODBC Driver
System                 = OSS73DEV.RCH.STGLABS.IBM.COM 
UserID                 = MYNAME
Password               = password123
Naming                 = 0
DefaultLibraries       = MIRISH
TrueAutoCommit         = 1
```
(**Note: The name of the driver specified in the `Driver` keyword must match the name of a driver defined in `odbcinst.ini`).

A complete list of IBM i Access ODBC Driver connection options for both DSN definitions and connection strings can be found at the [IBM Knowledge Center: Connection string keywords webpage](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzaik/connectkeywords.htm).

## Using Your DSNs

With your DSNs now set up, you can use them when connecting to Db2. Many open-source projects have ODBC packages that allow you to use your DSN to connect from your Linux machine to your IBM i. For example, Node.js has the `odbc` package, Python has `pyodbc`, etc.

To use your DSN, simply pass a connection string like so to the connection API for the open-source technology and package of your choice:

```
"DSN=MYDSN"
```
When you pass the connection string above, the odbc driver manager will look at your DSNs (both from the global `odbc.ini` and your personal `.odbc.ini`) and add all of the additional settings defined therein. In this way, you don't need to specify things like your username and password in your application, and can instead rely on your configuration files!