# Windows ODBC Setup

This page will help you set up your ODBC environment for accessing Db2 directly from a Windows machine. If you want to connect to your IBM i system from a [Linux](./2.linux.md) or an [IBM i](./2.ibmi.md), please consult those pages.

## Driver Manager Installation

Windows comes preinstalled with an ODBC driver manager. To access it, search for `Administrative Tools` on your system (either through the search bar, or `Control Panel > System and Security > AdministrativeTools`), and then from there select ODBC Data Sources (either 32-bit or 64-bit).

From this application, you can set up your drivers.

## Driver Installation

Now that you have the driver manager installed, you will have to install the ODBC driver that allows your IBM i machine to use unixODBC to talk to Db2. To get the driver, visit [the IBM i Access - Client Solutions page](https://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=isg3T1026805) and select **Downloads for IBM i Access Client Solutions**. After logging in and redirected to the IBM I Access Client Solutions download page, scroll down and download the **ACS Windows App Pkg English (64bit)**.

When the package has been downloaded and has been installed on your system, it should be available to see on your ODBC Data Source Administrator application.

## Configuring Your DSNs

When you have the driver installed on your system, you can now configure your datasource names (DSNs) that allow you to wrap all of your connection settings in one place that can be used by any ODBC application.

In ODBC Data Source Administrator, you can define either User DSNs or System DSNs. A User DSN will be available only to your Windows user, while a System DSN will be available to everyone.

To create a DSN, select either User DSN or System DSN and then select `Add` on the right-hand menu. It will prompt you to select a driver, and you will select `IBM i Access ODBC Driver`. Use the GUI to add configuration options, such as your username and passwords, threading, default library, and so on.

## Using Your DSNs

With your DSNs now set up, you can use them when connecting to Db2. Many open-source projects have ODBC connectors that allow you to use your DSN to connect to Db2 on i. For example, Node.js has the `odbc` package, Python has `pyodbc`, etc.

To use your DSN, simply pass a connection string like so to the connection API for the open-source technology and package of your choice:

```
"DSN=MYDSN"
```
When you pass the connection string above, the odbc driver manager will look at your DSNs (both from the global `odbc.ini` and your personal `.odbc.ini`) and add all of the additional settings defined therein. In this way, you don't need to specify things like your username and password in your application, and can instead rely on your configuration files!