## **Node.js Example**

This quick example will show how your configuration files might look on a non-IBM i machine as your are actively developing against Db2 on i, and then how you would go about transferring that same code to run on IBM i when you are ready to run in production.

For this example, we will be using Node.js and the `odbc` package available on NPM. Node.js is simply used as an example technology, and this same thing could be done with PHP, Python, R, or any other package that has the ability to connect to the ODBC driver manager.

## **Setting up your Development Environment**

### **Driver Manager, Driver, and DSNs**

First, you will have to install your driver manager and driver. Steps to do that can be found in the [Windows](#windows.md) or [Linux](./2.linux.md) pages of this tutorial. These pages will also tell you how to set up your Drivers and DSNs, which is a different process depending on if you are on Windows or Linux.

A dummy DSN for connecting to IBM i might look like:
```ini
[MYDSN]
Description            = My dummy IBM i system for this example
Driver                 = IBM i Access ODBC Driver
System                 = MY.IBMI.SYSTEM.COM
UserID                 = MYIBMIUSER
Password               = password1234
```

Note that your Driver name will have to match the name of a driver from your driver list (either in `odbcinst.ini` or in the Windows ODBC GUI).

### **Node.js**

Next, you will need to have Node.js installed. You can find the downloads at the [official Node.js website](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) or through your system's package manager.

When you have Node.js installed, navigate to a new folder to contain your project and run:

```
npm init -y
```

This will create a file for you called `package.json`, which tracks software you download from npm (among other things).

Next, install the `odbc` package, which allows Node.js to talk to your driver manager.

```
npm install odbc
```

You now have everything you need to connect to Db2 on i from your development machine!

## **Development**

Using the `odbc` package, and passing the name of your DSN as your connection string, all of your queries will be run against the IBM i system listed in the DSN.

**`app.js`**
```javascript
const odbc = require('odbc');

odbc.connect('DSN=MYDSN', (error, connection) => {
  if (error) { throw error; }
  // now have an open connection to IBM i from any Linux or Windows machine
  connection.query('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT', (error, result) => {
    if (error) { throw error; }
    console.log(result);
  })
});
```
In this way you can develop remotely instead of directly on IBM i, while still accessing Db2 for i.

## **Transfer to IBM i**

When you are ready to transfer your program to IBM i, you just need to make sure you have everything set up on that system.

### **Driver Manager, Driver, and DSNs**

Like on your development machine, you will have to install your driver manager and driver. Steps to do that can be found in [installation on IBM i](#installation-on-ibm-i) section. This section will also cover instructions for downloading the Db2 for i driver and how to configure your drivers and DSNs.

When you install the driver on IBM i, you automatically get a DSN labaled `*LOCAL` that is used to connect to the local Db2 on i database using the credentials of the user running the job that the connection is made from. On 7.2 and 7.3, this requires additional PTFs that are outlined in the [installation on IBM i](#installation-on-ibm-i) section. The `*LOCAL` DSN definition looks like:

```ini
### IBM provided DSN - do not remove this line ###
[*LOCAL]
Description = Default IBM i local database
Driver      = IBM i Access ODBC Driver
System      = localhost
UserID      = *CURRENT
### Start of DSN customization
### End of DSN customization
### IBM provided DSN - do not remove this line ###

```

### Node.js

Below is a simple example of using ODBC with Node.js. On IBM i, if you have the open-source environment installed, simply run:

```bash
$ yum install nodejs10
```

You will then have Node.js v10 on your system. You simply need to move your code over to your IBM i system. Because we want to connect to the local database, we change our DSN to be `*LOCAL` instead of `MYDSN`:

**`app.js`**
```javascript
const odbc = require('odbc');

odbc.connect('DSN=*LOCAL', (error, connection) => {
  if (error) { throw error; }
  // now have an open connection to IBM i from any Linux or Windows machine
  connection.query('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT', (error, result) => {
    if (error) { throw error; }
    console.log(result);
  })
});
```